.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.Dd November 25, 2001
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.Dt PDUMPFS 8
.Sh NAME
.Nm pdumpfs
.Nd A daily backup system similar to Plan9's dumpfs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar src-dir dest-dir
.Op dest-basename
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a simple daily backup system written in
.Nm Ruby ( Xr ruby 1 ) ,
which is similar to Plan9's
.Nm dumpfs
that preserves every daily snapshot.
.Pp
Back up your home directory with
.Nm ,
and you can retrieve any past day's snapshot of any file.
.Pp
.Nm
constructs each day's snapshot in the directory named
.Pa YYYY/MM/DD
under the destination directory.  All source files are copied to the
snapshot directory for the first time, and on and after the second
time,
.Nm
copies only updated or newly created files and stores unchanged files
as hard links to the files of the previous day's snapshot to save disk
space.
.Pp
The latest version of
.Nm
is always available at
.Pa http://namazu.org/~satoru/pdumpfs/ .
.Sh EXAMPLE
To backup your home directory
.Pa /home/yourname
to
.Pa /backup ,
run the following command.
.Pp
.Dl pdumpfs /home/yourname /backup >/backup/log 2>/backup/error-log
.Pp
On and after the second day, it is a good idea to invoke the backup
command with
.Xr cron 8
daemon.  Adding the following line to your crontab file allows you to
back up your home directory at 5 a.m. everyday.
.Pp
.Dl 00 05 * * * pdumpfs /home/yourname /backup >/backup/log 2>/backup/error-log
.Pp
If the backup system works well, you can retrieve any given day's file
with a file name like
.Pa /backup/2001/02/19/yourname/ . . .
.Sh LIMITATION
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Nm
can only handle normal files, directories, and symbolic links.
.Pp
.It
.Nm
may not work on systems other than
.Ux
because
.Nm
utilizes hard links.
.Pp
.It
.Nm
is not suited for a directory containing large files which are updated
frequently.
.Pp
.It
If more than 31 day absence occurs, incremental backup would not be
performed.  So, back up your files on a daily basis.
.Pp
.It
With
.Nm ,
you can safely remove unnecessary files because the past files can be
retrieved at any time.  However, you must not rely too much on
.Nm .
It may have serious bugs.
.El
.Sh TIPS
.Bl -dash
.It
If the total disk usage increases by 10 MB everyday, about 4 GB disk
space will be consumed every year.  It would not matter so much
considering the recent evolution of computer resources.
.Pp
.It
Back up your files to a physically separated device. 
.Pp
.It
On some systems, files can be made immutable.
.Pp
To make all files in
.Pa /backup
immutable on Linux, run the following command as root:
.Pp
.Dl chattr -R +i /backup
.Pp
On
.Bx 4.4
derived systems, run the following command as root:
.Pp
.Dl chflags -R schg /backup
.Pp
These commands will keep you from accidentally
removing your backup files with
.Cm "rm -rf" .
.El
.Sh AUTHOR
.Nm
and the HTML document were written by
.An Satoru Takabayashi Aq satoru@namazu.org .
.Pp
This manual page was translated from the HTML document by
.An Hiroyuki Shimada Aq shimaden@din.or.jp ,
and reformatted by
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chattr 1 ,
.Xr chflags 1 ,
.Xr crontab 5 ,
.Xr cron 8
